README.md, before:

<div align="center">
    <img src="./overview.png", width="600">
    <!-- <img src="./overview.png"> -->
</div>

# XNA Basecaller

Code for paper: "Direct high-throughput deconvolution of unnatural bases via nanopore sequencing and bootstrapped learning".

In our work we show how to achieve high-throughput sequencing of DNA containing Unnatural Bases (UBs), a.k.a Non-Canonical Bases (NCBs), using Nanopore and de novo basecalling enabled by spliced-based data-augmentation. The code here contains a basecaller architecture modified for learning to also basecall 1 or 2 additional UBs, and includes real-time data-augmentation for generating train data with UBs in all possible sequencing contexts.

More details in the preprint: https://biorxiv.org/cgi/content/short/2024.12.02.625113v1

## Setup

### Installation

Full installation should take only a few minutes (<5 mins).

Download Minimap or create a symbolic link to it at `bin/minimap2`:

```bash
curl -L https://github.com/lh3/minimap2/releases/download/v2.17/minimap2-2.17_x64-linux.tar.bz2 | tar -jxvf - minimap2-2.17_x64-linux/minimap2
mv -v minimap2-2.17_x64-linux bin
```

Install python enviroment:

```bash
conda env create -f env.yml
conda activate xna_bc
```

Install UB-Bonito. Recommended to install with xna_bc activated to ensure valid python version (v3.9) is utilized.

```bash
cd ub-bonito
python3 -m venv venv3
source venv3/bin/activate
pip install --upgrade pip
pip install -r requirements.txt
# pip install -r requirements-cuda113.txt --extra-index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu113/
python setup.py develop
deactivate
```

### Download Data

Run `./download_data.sh` script from the project root directory to download all the necessary files (Total 11GB). Might take several minutes (>10 mins):

- XNA basecaller baseline model (pre-trained with DNA only)
- Evaluation reads from POC and Complex libraries (fast5 files)
- Pre-processed DNA and XNA train data files (e.g. chunks, references and segmentations)

## Usage

In order to run the following scripts, make sure the correct conda enviroment is activated (`conda activate xna_bc`) and ub-bonito venv3 is **deactivated**.

<ins>_HINT_</ins>: Make sure bash files have execute permission (`chmod +x *.sh`)

### Training

Use `train_and_eval.sh` to run basecaller training and evaluation. See file for more options available.

Quick runs (around 20 mins or less):

- Fully-synthetic - ~25% UB Acc.:
    - `./train_and_eval.sh POC training/fully_synth-ubs_X-data_0.01-ub_prop_0.10 ub-bonito/bonito/data/dna_r9.4.1/sampled_0.01/ 0.10 -u X -b 98 -e 1 -Z`
- Hybrid - ~10% UB Acc.:
    - `./train_and_eval.sh POC training/hybrid-ubs_X-data_0.01-ub_prop_0.10 ub-bonito/bonito/data/dna_r9.4.1/sampled_0.01/ 0.10 -u X -b 98 -e 1`
- Spliced - ~15% UB Acc.:
    - `./train_and_eval.sh POC training/spliced-ubs_X-data_0.01-ub_prop_0.10 ub-bonito/bonito/data/dna_r9.4.1/sampled_0.01/ 0.10 -u X -b 98 -e 1 -m per_kmer`

Final models (should take a few hours), 70-80% UB Acc.:

```bash
for UBS in X Y XY; do
./train_and_eval.sh CPLX training/spliced-ubs_$UBS-data_0.25-ub_prop_0.09-unfr_3 ub-bonito/bonito/data/dna_r9.4.1/sampled_0.25/ 0.09 -u $UBS -W -b 98 -m per_kmer -f -F 3 -E POC;
done
```

<ins>_NOTE_</ins>: Spliced method real-time train data generation requires many workers to avoid being the bottleneck depending on the batch size chosen. Recommended 32 CPUs (argument `-w 32`) and larger batch size (`-b 512`) for faster training.

### Evaluation

Use `eval_model.sh` to run ad-hoc basecaller evaluation. See file for more options available.
- `./eval_model.sh POC training/fully_synth-ubs_X-data_0.01-ub_prop_0.10 -b 98 -u X`

### Additional Tools

Compare basecalling performances `src/tools/comp_basecalls_perf.py`
- Ex: `python src/tools/comp_basecalls_perf.py training/*`
- Use `-d` argument to output detailed performance per template and UB position

Segment train data chunks `src/tools/dtw_segmentation.py`
- Employs DTW to group signals from the same kmer based on the signal reference model
- Outputs "breakpoints.npy", file required by the train data generator embedded in ub-bonito
- Tool used to estimate breakpoints from pre-processed DNA and XNA train data
- Ex: `python src/tools/dtw_segmentation.py ub-bonito/bonito/data/dna_r9.4.1/sampled_0.01/ -p --pool_chunksize 1`

## Results

Final model performance on POC library:

Method | UB(s) | UB(s) Acc. | DNA Acc.
-- | -- | -- | --
Spliced | X | 77% | 91%
Spliced | Y | 81% | 92%
Spliced | XY | 71% | 92%

## (Potential) Future updates

- UB kmer modeling script and tools
- End-to-end framework/pipeline description and/or script
- More utility tools

## Citation

Preprint: https://biorxiv.org/cgi/content/short/2024.12.02.625113v1

```
@article{perez2024,
    author={Mauricio Perez and Michiko Kimoto and Priscilla Rajakumar and Chayaporn Suphavilai and Rafael Peres da Silva and Hui Pen Tan and Nicholas Ting Xun Ong and Hannah Nicholas and Ichiro Hirao and Chew Wei Leong and Niranjan Nagarajan},
    title={Direct high-throughput deconvolution of unnatural bases via nanopore sequencing and bootstrapped learning},
    journal={bioRxiv}, 
    year={2024},
    doi={10.1101/2024.12.02.625113}
}
```

Commit message:

Update README.md - ENA addition
Added reference to ENA project containing our nanopore sequencing data.

README.md, after:

<div align="center">
    <img src="./overview.png", width="600">
    <!-- <img src="./overview.png"> -->
</div>

# XNA Basecaller

Code for paper: "Direct high-throughput deconvolution of unnatural bases via nanopore sequencing and bootstrapped learning".

In our work we show how to achieve high-throughput sequencing of DNA containing Unnatural Bases (UBs), a.k.a Non-Canonical Bases (NCBs), using Nanopore and de novo basecalling enabled by spliced-based data-augmentation. The code here contains a basecaller architecture modified for learning to also basecall 1 or 2 additional UBs, and includes real-time data-augmentation for generating train data with UBs in all possible sequencing contexts.

More details in the preprint: https://biorxiv.org/cgi/content/short/2024.12.02.625113v1

## Setup

### Installation

Full installation should take only a few minutes (<5 mins).

Download Minimap or create a symbolic link to it at `bin/minimap2`:

```bash
curl -L https://github.com/lh3/minimap2/releases/download/v2.17/minimap2-2.17_x64-linux.tar.bz2 | tar -jxvf - minimap2-2.17_x64-linux/minimap2
mv -v minimap2-2.17_x64-linux bin
```

Install python enviroment:

```bash
conda env create -f env.yml
conda activate xna_bc
```

Install UB-Bonito. Recommended to install with xna_bc activated to ensure valid python version (v3.9) is utilized.

```bash
cd ub-bonito
python3 -m venv venv3
source venv3/bin/activate
pip install --upgrade pip
pip install -r requirements.txt
# pip install -r requirements-cuda113.txt --extra-index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu113/
python setup.py develop
deactivate
```

### Download Data

Run `./download_data.sh` script from the project root directory to download all the necessary files (Total 11GB). Might take several minutes (>10 mins):

- XNA basecaller baseline model (pre-trained with DNA only)
- Evaluation reads from POC and Complex libraries (fast5 files)
- Pre-processed DNA and XNA train data files (e.g. chunks, references and segmentations)

<ins>_NOTE_</ins>: These files are kept to a minimum to reproduce our basecaller results, including pre-processed data used for training and a subset of the sequenced reads used for evaluation.
The complete set of our nanopore sequencing data is available from the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) under project accession number [PRJEB82716](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/PRJEB82716).

## Usage

In order to run the following scripts, make sure the correct conda enviroment is activated (`conda activate xna_bc`) and ub-bonito venv3 is **deactivated**.

<ins>_HINT_</ins>: Make sure bash files have execute permission (`chmod +x *.sh`)

### Training

Use `train_and_eval.sh` to run basecaller training and evaluation. See file for more options available.

Quick runs (around 20 mins or less):

- Fully-synthetic - ~25% UB Acc.:
    - `./train_and_eval.sh POC training/fully_synth-ubs_X-data_0.01-ub_prop_0.10 ub-bonito/bonito/data/dna_r9.4.1/sampled_0.01/ 0.10 -u X -b 98 -e 1 -Z`
- Hybrid - ~10% UB Acc.:
    - `./train_and_eval.sh POC training/hybrid-ubs_X-data_0.01-ub_prop_0.10 ub-bonito/bonito/data/dna_r9.4.1/sampled_0.01/ 0.10 -u X -b 98 -e 1`
- Spliced - ~15% UB Acc.:
    - `./train_and_eval.sh POC training/spliced-ubs_X-data_0.01-ub_prop_0.10 ub-bonito/bonito/data/dna_r9.4.1/sampled_0.01/ 0.10 -u X -b 98 -e 1 -m per_kmer`

Final models (should take a few hours), 70-80% UB Acc.:

```bash
for UBS in X Y XY; do
./train_and_eval.sh CPLX training/spliced-ubs_$UBS-data_0.25-ub_prop_0.09-unfr_3 ub-bonito/bonito/data/dna_r9.4.1/sampled_0.25/ 0.09 -u $UBS -W -b 98 -m per_kmer -f -F 3 -E POC;
done
```

<ins>_NOTE_</ins>: Spliced method real-time train data generation requires many workers to avoid being the bottleneck depending on the batch size chosen. Recommended 32 CPUs (argument `-w 32`) and larger batch size (`-b 512`) for faster training.

### Evaluation

Use `eval_model.sh` to run ad-hoc basecaller evaluation. See file for more options available.
- `./eval_model.sh POC training/fully_synth-ubs_X-data_0.01-ub_prop_0.10 -b 98 -u X`

### Additional Tools

Compare basecalling performances `src/tools/comp_basecalls_perf.py`
- Ex: `python src/tools/comp_basecalls_perf.py training/*`
- Use `-d` argument to output detailed performance per template and UB position

Segment train data chunks `src/tools/dtw_segmentation.py`
- Employs DTW to group signals from the same kmer based on the signal reference model
- Outputs "breakpoints.npy", file required by the train data generator embedded in ub-bonito
- Tool used to estimate breakpoints from pre-processed DNA and XNA train data
- Ex: `python src/tools/dtw_segmentation.py ub-bonito/bonito/data/dna_r9.4.1/sampled_0.01/ -p --pool_chunksize 1`

## Results

Final model performance on POC library:

Method | UB(s) | UB(s) Acc. | DNA Acc.
-- | -- | -- | --
Spliced | X | 77% | 91%
Spliced | Y | 81% | 92%
Spliced | XY | 71% | 92%

## (Potential) Future updates

- UB kmer modeling script and tools
- End-to-end framework/pipeline description and/or script
- More utility tools

## Citation

Preprint: https://biorxiv.org/cgi/content/short/2024.12.02.625113v1

```
@article{perez2024,
    author={Mauricio Perez and Michiko Kimoto and Priscilla Rajakumar and Chayaporn Suphavilai and Rafael Peres da Silva and Hui Pen Tan and Nicholas Ting Xun Ong and Hannah Nicholas and Ichiro Hirao and Chew Wei Leong and Niranjan Nagarajan},
    title={Direct high-throughput deconvolution of unnatural bases via nanopore sequencing and bootstrapped learning},
    journal={bioRxiv}, 
    year={2024},
    doi={10.1101/2024.12.02.625113}
}
```
